# CS-499 and my path to it

I have spent three years working through the Bachelor of Science, Computer Science course at Southern New Hampshire University.  After high school, I joined the U.S. Army and spent eh next 14 years traveling the world, growing up and at times in combat.  For a very long time, I was not sure what my future would hold.  Much of the time, I viewed my career path more physical then mental.  

As I progressed through the military, computers were becoming more and more prevalent in daily duties and jobs.  Thinking back to my high school years and having my first computer, a 50-pound monstrosity that ran simple DOS based programs and a dot matrix printer, I began to assist my units in expanding their computing capabilities.  I did this for nearly 5 years before I became disabled and medically completed my military career.

Shortly after completing my military career in 1999, I was hired as a Network Administrator at a large manufacturing company.  At the time, I was still quite unskilled in Information Technology.  My new supervisor took me under his wing, educated me, and allowed me to grow as a technology professional.  Over more than 25 years, I have learned a tremendous number of technology things simply from having to learn as I went to resolve issues.  While I was an effective employee, there were major gaps in my knowledge and skills that, at time, inhibited my growth as an information technology professional.  

As I was building my career, I was also building my family.  I had 4 children.  My oldest two started careers that did not necessarily require further college education after high school.  My oldest daughter became a successful nail tech.  My oldest son joined the U.S. Army.  Where my perspective began to change was when my youngest daughter “decided” that her goal in life was to become a bio-mechanical engineer and redesign heart valves.  She hung life size posters of the human body and even had a favorite bone in the body.  Realizing that it had been a few generations of my family since any had gone to college let alone graduated, changed my thoughts on having my daughter become the first.  I realized that I needed to show her that it was possible.  I enrolled at Southern New Hampshire University and began to fill those gaps in my knowledge. She enrolled in Truckee Meadows Community College 1 year after I started.  We were now in a race to complete our degrees.

----

I took a bit of time to determine what I wanted to take for a degree.  I decided on a BS in Computer Science.  This would cover some of what I thought I already knew and fill in my gaps allowing me to both learn new things and enhance my current knowledge.  As I started classes I hit a wall with IT145, Foundation in Application Development.  I needed to learn a new language in java, and this allowed me to develop and show my strength in developing code.   It took me a while to understand how java applications are written.  This project will be based on 2 of that artifacts I developed during this course.  
As I continued to take classes, I had few other classes that I felt I knew quite a bit about, yet once I started them, I learned my knowledge only scuffed the surface of them.  One of these was CS-320 Software test and Automation & QA.  I began this class the first time I took it, thinking that I knew a lot about QA and testing systems.  I have assisted with the testing and QA on a medical software company I worked at for over 7 years.  What I learned was there is a very specific set of steps required on the development side to not only test but to test effectively.  I had to learn how to understand how the application code was written and then how to apply Junit testing code to ensure that individual sections and entire code flow was tested properly.  The second time I took this class I learned a tremendous amount of how code it written and how to the logical flow around the code happens.  Once I began to understand this code flow, I had a much better idea of how to test effectively. The class taught me to better understand how code functions, be able to break it down and work through those issues identified by testing.
I took CS-250 Software Development Lifecycle.  This expanded on my knowledge of the development lifecycle.  It helped me better understand the agile development process that I apply regularly at work nearly every week when dealing with code or with vendors that delivering applications to my company. 
CS33 Computer graphics, CS340 Client server development, IT320 Network security.  I gained new knowledge from every class, some were easy, others I struggled but from everyone I took information and 
I have been working in the IT field for almost 25 years.  During this time, I have developed my administration skills and have worked in code development using WISA (Windows, IIS, ASP, and MS SQL) for the last few years to assist my company in developing web-based application to help manage Bond investment, College Savings programs, and other financial applications. This has allowed me to understand many of the concepts with code development. I learned that while I know specific languages and it helps with conceptual understanding, many languages have specific items that need to be learned to perform well.

-----

My CS-499 Cap Stone project needs to identify and enhance artifacts from the code I wrote during other classes.  The specific things I need to evaluate and enhance are
1.	Software Design and Engineering
2.	Algorithms and Data Structures
3.	Databases
-----
##Software Design and Engineering

The first artifact I selected to enhance is a very simple paint the wall console application.  It ran as a console and took multiple inputs and calculated the amount of paint needed to fully paint a wall based on the input measurements.  As it was initially intended to be a simple application, there was nothing written into the application to catch and parse any errors.  For example, it was only able to work with positive number.  It was unable to handle negative numbers, letters, or other characters.  When writing quality code, I learned that it was necessary to ensure you catch and write the ability to handle errors within the code to prevent it from crashing when it receives bad inputs.  I first added the ability to input an exit command allowing to application to close gracefully if the users request it.  As the application, asks for a variety of inputs, the system will check and reset if the inputs are not a positive number.  This showed my ability to identify potential issues and develop code that is not fragile and will survive bad inputs and still function. 

##Algorithms and Data Structures

IT145’s final project was a choice between 2 development projects.  First was a monitoring application and the second was an authentication system to allow the various Zoo employees to log in and identify their job duties.  I chose the second and wrote a simple console application that accepted a username and password and then based on that combination returned the contents of a text file to the console. To show my additional skill at design and engineering, I also completely rewrote this application. The Zookeeper application originally used a java console for the application.  I took the concept and rewrote the application using Windows Communication Foundation and C# on application layer.  I used IIS for the presentation layer with ASP.net and MS SQL as the database for the data layer.  Changing this into a web-based logon application using a MS SQL data layer required me to change how I looked at the process.  It required the ability of a web server to accept input, pass it along to a mid-tier application layer that then passed it to the Data layer.  While I used WISA (Windows, IIS, SQL, ASP.net) all on a single workstation for development, each piece can be run on its own individual server for performance, redundancy, or security.  The Presentation layer the webpage the pages run on would be secured with a certificate and using TLS ensuring data in transit would be secure, additionally once completed the password column in the user table would be encrypted at rest.  

##Databases

Throughout my career, I have been tasked with managing MS SQL databases.  The final requirement for this project is enhance the original project is a database enhancement.  The zookeeper application had no database as it used text files to store the data for the application.  My enhancement creates a MS SQL database to store the information.  This also allows the information to be stored as it expands with out major impact on performance As that is the database, I am more comfortable with, I used this for my applications data layer.  I wrote multiple scripts stored in my files as text files.  These files created 2 stored procedures, 2 tables and a database security user account for use in the application layer for connections.  
The stored procedures created perform necessary functions for the application.  The first one takes the user input passed from the presentation layer through the application layer, compares it with the table and returns confirmation and information to the application layer.  The second stored procedure locates and returns the user data to be presented in the application layer.
The scripts also create 2 tables.  One holds the user name and password and the other links with keys to User information to include first name, last name, phone number and job duties.  Finally, one creates the service user ad password to allow the mid-tier application layer service to connect and talk to the database
